\chapter{Conclusion}
\label{chapter:conclusion}


%%%% A summary of the main part of the text

In this thesis, we have proposed a novel approach to 3D face
reconstruction, which can be learnt in an end-to-end fashion and is
resilient to large pose, unusual expressions and
occlusion. Additionally, our method is insensitive to alignment,
minimising the requirements for careful initialisation, improving
reliability overall. We compared our method to several other
state-of-the-art methods, and out performed all of them by a large
margin. We showed how the related task of face alignment can be used
to assist the 3D reconstruction process. We demonstrated that our
method is able to work well also on the task of human body
reconstruction. In doing so, we also demonstrated that our method is
able to reconstruct fine details, such as wrinkles in clothing, when
trained with high quality data. This strongly suggests that our method
will also be capable of working on other deformable objects.

To demonstrate our confidence in the 3D face reconstruction method
presented in Chapter~\ref{chapter:face}, a website was
developed\footnote{http://cvl-demos.cs.nott.ac.uk/vrn}, allowing users
to upload an image of a face and be presented with an interactive 3D
model. The impact of which far exceeded any of our expectations. To
date, this website has reconstructed more than 1 million
faces. Feedback from users has been positive and the resultant models
have been used for a multitude of purposes; from comforting those who
have lost loved ones, to being used in music videos and assisting in
teaching school children about 3D printing. Additionally, code for our
3D face reconstruction method has been made
available\footnote{https://github.com/AaronJackson/vrn} under the MIT
license.

\section{Future Work}

In Chapter~\ref{chapter:face} we presented results which demonstrate
Volumetric Regression Networks as being a high performing,
state-of-the-art method for 3D face reconstruction. Despite these
results, 3D face reconstruction will continue to be an active research
area for quite some time. In this section, we will discuss some
potential directions for future work, specifically aimed at Volumetric
Regression Networks.

\subsection{Incremental Detail Refinement} % Detail

Volumetric Regression Networks require a significant amount of
training data to produce high quality results - this is a limitation
of our method. Furthermore, obtaining high quality \textit{and}
detailed data, containing blemishes and wrinkles, in a natural (or
\textit{in-the-wild} setting is difficult, if not impossible. As such,
there is a clear requirement for a method which is able to learn this
in a semi-supervised, if not entirely unsupervised manner.

\subsection{Texture Synthesis}

Our method for 3D face reconstruction does not attempt to produce any
kind of texture map or colour information, instead we focused on the
reconstruction aspect only. The online demo of this method, mentioned
earlier, does render faces with a texture. However, this is simply the
original image projected onto the 3D model using the $x,y$
coordinates. This occasionally results in strange artefacts around the
sides of the reconstruction. An interesting direction for future work
may be to improve this, by simultaneously regressing a warped texture
image which can wrap around the regressed 3D model.

\subsection{Fixed Correspondence}

One of the advantages of 3DMM based approaches to 3D face
reconstruction is that vertices have a fixed index across all meshes
(except for a few cases, such as ??, where the mesh is modified in a
refinement step). As VRN produces a volumetric representation, both
the number of vertices and the order of them varies, depending on the
face or surface extraction algorithm used. This somewhat hinders the
ease-of-use for applications such as applications, as vertices would
have to be selected manually. There are a number of potential
solutions to this problem, such as regressing a vertex map, in a
similar fashion to aforementioned texture synthesis. Alternatively, as
a post-processing step, resampling and ordering the vertices.



%%% Local Variables:
%%% TeX-master: "../thesis"
%%% End:
